lib-app and lib-schema docs #413 (#414)
enonic/doc-xp: docs/api/lib-schema.adoc

= Dynamic schema library
:toc: right
:imagesdir: ../images

Functions to fetch and manipulate dynamic schemas.

== Usage

Add the following into your `build.gradle` file:

[source,groovy]
----
dependencies {
  include "com.enonic.xp:lib-schema:${xpVersion}"
}
----

In your JavaScript controller, add a require statement:

```js
var schemaLib = require('/lib/xp/schema');
```

You are now free to use the library functionality.

== Functions

=== getSchema

> Fetches schema from an application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Fetches a schema from an application.
```

[.lead]
Parameters

[%header,cols="1%,1%,97%a"]
[frame="none"]
[grid="none"]
|===
| Name   | Type   | Description
| params | object | JSON with parameters

[%header,cols="1%,1%,97%a"]
[frame="topbot"]
[grid="none"]
[caption=""]
.Properties
!===
! Name      ! Type   !  Description
! name      ! string !  Schema name
! type      ! string !  Schema type(`CONTENT_TYPE`, `MIXIN` or `XDATA`)
!===

|===

[.lead]
Returns

> *object* : (<<#schema,`Schema`>>) Detail information for the fetched schema.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*object* : (<<#schema,`Schema`>>) Properties object of the fetched schema.
```

[.lead]
Example

.Creates a content type schema:
```js
var result = schemaLib.getSchema({
    name: 'myapp:mytype',
    type: 'CONTENT_TYPE'

});
```
.Return value:
```js
var expected = {
  "name": "myapp:mytype",
  "displayName": "Tag",
  "displayNameI18nKey": "",
  "createdTime": "2021-09-25T10:00:00Z",
  "creator": "user:system:anonymous",
  "modifiedTime": "2021-09-25T10:00:00Z",
  "resource" : <!-- resource string value -->,
  "type": "CONTENT_TYPE",
  "icon": {
    "data": {},
    "mimeType": "image/png",
    "modifiedTime": "2016-01-01T12:00:00Z"
  },
  "form": [
    {
      "formItemType": "Input",
      "name": "tag",
      "label": "Tag, unlimited occurrences",
      "maximize": true,
      "inputType": "Tag",
      "occurrences": {
        "maximum": 0,
        "minimum": 0
      },
      "config": {}
    }
  ],
  "config": {}
};
```

=== createSchema

> Creates dynamic schema in virtual application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Creates a dynamic schema in a virtual application.
```

[.lead]
Parameters

[%header,cols="1%,1%,97%a"]
[frame="none"]
[grid="none"]
|===
| Name   | Type   | Description
| params | object | JSON with parameters

[%header,cols="1%,1%,97%a"]
[frame="topbot"]
[grid="none"]
[caption=""]
.Properties
!===
! Name      ! Type   !  Description
! name      ! string !  Dynamic schema name
! type      ! string !  Dynamic schema type(`CONTENT_TYPE`,`MIXIN` or `XDATA`)
! resource  ! string !  Dynamic schema resource value
!===

|===

[.lead]
Returns

> *object* : (<<#schema,`Schema`>>) Detail information for the created dynamic schema.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*object* : (<<#schema,`Schema`>>) Properties object of the created schema.
```

               <super-type>base:structured</super-type>
               <form>
                 <input name="tag" type="Tag">
                   <label>Tag, unlimited occurrences</label>
                   <occurrences minimum="0"
                    maximum="0"/>
                 </input>
               </form>
              </content-type>`;

var result = schemaLib.createSchema({
    name: 'myapp:mytype',
    type: 'CONTENT_TYPE',
    resource

});
```
.Return value:
```js
var expected = {
  "name": "myapp:mytype",
  "displayName": "Tag",
  "displayNameI18nKey": "",
  "createdTime": "2021-09-25T10:00:00Z",
  "creator": "user:system:anonymous",
  "modifiedTime": "2021-09-25T10:00:00Z",
  "resource" : <!-- resource string value -->,
  "type": "CONTENT_TYPE",
  "icon": {
    "data": {},
    "mimeType": "image/png",
    "modifiedTime": "2016-01-01T12:00:00Z"
  },
  "form": [
    {
      "formItemType": "Input",
      "name": "tag",
      "label": "Tag, unlimited occurrences",
      "maximize": true,
      "inputType": "Tag",
      "occurrences": {
        "maximum": 0,
        "minimum": 0
      },
      "config": {}
    }
  ],
  "config": {}
};
```

=== updateSchema

> Updates dynamic schema in virtual application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Updates a dynamic schema in a virtual application.
```

[.lead]
Parameters

[%header,cols="1%,1%,97%a"]
[frame="none"]
[grid="none"]
|===
| Name   | Type   | Description
| params | object | JSON with parameters

[%header,cols="1%,1%,97%a"]
[frame="topbot"]
[grid="none"]
[caption=""]
.Properties
!===
! Name      ! Type   !  Description
! name      ! string !  Dynamic schema name
! type      ! string !  Dynamic schema type(`CONTENT_TYPE`,`MIXIN` or `XDATA`)
! resource  ! string !  Dynamic schema resource value
!===

|===

[.lead]
Returns

> *object* : (<<#schema,`Schema`>>) Detail information for the modified dynamic schema.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*object* : (<<#schema,`Schema`>>) Properties object of the modified schema.
```

          <description>Mixin description</description>
          <form>
            <input type='TextLine' name='text2'>
              <label>Text 2</label>
            </input>

            <mixin name='myapplication:inline'/>
          </form>
        </mixin>`;

var result = schemaLib.createSchema({
    name: 'myapp:mytype',
    type: 'MIXIN',
    resource

});
```
.Return value:
```js
var expected = {
    name: 'myapp:mytype',
    displayName: 'Virtual Mixin',
    displayNameI18nKey: '',
    description: 'Mixin description',
    descriptionI18nKey: '',
    createdTime: '2021-09-25T10:00:00Z',
    modifiedTime: '2021-09-25T10:00:00Z',
    resource: <!-- resource string value -->,
    type: 'MIXIN',
    form: [
        {
            'formItemType': 'Input',
            'name': 'text2',
            'label': 'Text 2',
            'maximize': true,
            'inputType': 'TextLine',
            'occurrences': {
                'maximum': 1,
                'minimum': 0
            },
            'config': {}
        },
        {
            'formItemType': 'InlineMixin',
            'name': 'myapplication:inline'
        }
    ]
};
```

=== deleteSchema

> Removes dynamic schema from virtual application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Removes a dynamic schema from a virtual application.
```

[.lead]
Parameters

[%header,cols="1%,1%,97%a"]
[frame="none"]
[grid="none"]
|===
| Name   | Type   | Description
| params | object | JSON with parameters

[%header,cols="1%,1%,97%a"]
[frame="topbot"]
[grid="none"]
[caption=""]
.Properties
!===
! Name      ! Type   !  Description
! name      ! string !  Dynamic schema name
! type      ! string !  Dynamic schema type(`CONTENT_TYPE`,`MIXIN` or `XDATA`)
!===

|===

[.lead]
Returns

*boolean* : `true` if the deletion was successful.

[.lead]
Example

> .Updates a mixin schema:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Deletes a mixin schema:
```

```js
var result = schemaLib.deleteSchema({
    name: 'myapp:mytype',
    type: 'XDATA'
});

if (result) {
    log.info('Deleted x-data: [myapp:mytype]');
} else {
    log.info('X-data deletion failed: [myapp:mytype]');
}
```

=== getComponent

> Fetches component from an application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Fetches a component from an application.
```

[.lead]
Parameters

[%header,cols="1%,1%,97%a"]
[frame="none"]
[grid="none"]
|===
| Name   | Type   | Description
| params | object | JSON with parameters

[%header,cols="1%,1%,97%a"]
[frame="topbot"]
[grid="none"]
[caption=""]
.Properties
!===
! Name      ! Type   !  Description
! key       ! string !  Component key
! type      ! string !  Component type(`PAGE`, `PART` or `LAYOUT`)
!===

|===

[.lead]
Returns

> *object* : (<<#component,`Component`>>) Detail information for the fetched component.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*object* : (<<#component,`Component`>>) Properties object of the fetched component.
```

[.lead]
Example

.Fetches a page component:
```js
var result = schemaLib.getComponent({
    key: 'myapp:mypage',
    type: 'PAGE'

});
```
.Return value:
```js
var expected = {
    key: 'myapp:mypage',
    displayName: 'News page',
    description: 'My news page',
    descriptionI18nKey: 'key.description',
    componentPath: 'myapp:/site/pages/mypage',
    modifiedTime: '2021-02-25T10:44:33.170079900Z',
    resource: '<page><some-data></some-data></page>',
    type: 'PAGE',
    form: [
        {
            'formItemType': 'Input',
            'name': 'width',
            'label': 'width',
            'maximize': true,
            'inputType': 'Double',
            'occurrences': {
                'maximum': 1,
                'minimum': 0
            },
            'config': {}
        }
    ],
    config: {},
    regions: [
        'region-one'
    ]
};
```

=== createComponent

> Creates dynamic component in virtual application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Creates a dynamic component in a virtual application.
```

[.lead]
Parameters

[%header,cols="1%,1%,97%a"]
[frame="none"]
[grid="none"]
|===
| Name   | Type   | Description
| params | object | JSON with parameters

[%header,cols="1%,1%,97%a"]
[frame="topbot"]
[grid="none"]
[caption=""]
.Properties
!===
! Name      ! Type   !  Description
! key       ! string !  Dynamic component key
! type      ! string !  Dynamic schema type(`PAGE`, `PART` or `LAYOUT`)
! resource  ! string !  Dynamic component resource value
!===

|===

[.lead]
Returns

> *object* : (<<#component,`Component`>>) Detail information for the created dynamic component.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*object* : (<<#component,`Component`>>) Properties object of the created dynamic component.
```

                 </input>
               </form>
              </content-type>`;

var result = schemaLib.createComponent({
    key: 'myapp:mypart',
    type: 'PART',
    resource
});
```
.Return value:
```js
var expected = {
    key: 'myapp:mypart',
    displayName: 'Virtual Part',
    displayNameI18nKey: 'key.display-name',
    description: 'My Part Description',
    descriptionI18nKey: 'key.description',
    componentPath: 'myapp:/site/parts/mypart',
    modifiedTime: '2021-09-25T10:00:00Z',
    resource: <!-- resource string value -->,
    type: 'PART',
    form: [
        {
            'formItemType': 'Input',
            'name': 'width',
            'label': 'Column width',
            'helpText': 'key.help-text',
            'maximize': true,
            'inputType': 'Double',
            'occurrences': {
                'maximum': 1,
                'minimum': 0
            },
            'config': {}
        },
        {
            'formItemType': 'InlineMixin',
            'name': 'myapplication:link-urls'
        }
    ],

    config: {
        'input': [{
            'value': '', '@name': 'width', '@type': 'Double'
        }]
    }
};
```

=== updateComponent

> Updates dynamic component in virtual application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Updates a dynamic component in a virtual application.
```

[.lead]
Parameters

[%header,cols="1%,1%,97%a"]
[frame="none"]
[grid="none"]
|===
| Name   | Type   | Description
| params | object | JSON with parameters

[%header,cols="1%,1%,97%a"]
[frame="topbot"]
[grid="none"]
[caption=""]
.Properties
!===
! Name      ! Type   !  Description
! key       ! string !  Dynamic component key
! type      ! string !  Dynamic component type(`PAGE`, `PART` or `LAYOUT`)
! resource  ! string !  Dynamic component resource value
!===

|===

[.lead]
Returns

> *object* : (<<#component,`Component`>>) Detail information for the modified dynamic component.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*object* : (<<#component,`Component`>>) Properties object of the modified dynamic component.
```

            'name': 'myFormItemSet',
            'label': 'My form item set',
            'occurrences': {
                'maximum': 1,
                'minimum': 0
            },
            'items': [
                {
                    'formItemType': 'Input',
                    'name': 'myTextLine',
                    'label': 'My text line',
                    'maximize': true,
                    'inputType': 'TextLine',
                    'occurrences': {
                        'maximum': 1,
                        'minimum': 1
                    },
                    'config': {}
                },
                {
                    'formItemType': 'Input',
                    'name': 'myCustomInput',
                    'label': 'My custom input',
                    'maximize': true,
                    'inputType': 'TextLine',
                    'occurrences': {
                        'maximum': 1,
                        'minimum': 0
                    },
                    'config': {}
                }
            ]
        }
    ],
    config: {},
    regions: [
        'header',
        'main',
        'footer'
    ]
};
```

=== deleteComponent

> Removes dynamic component from virtual application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Removes a dynamic component from a virtual application.
```

[.lead]
Parameters

[%header,cols="1%,1%,97%a"]
[frame="none"]
[grid="none"]
|===
| Name   | Type   | Description
| params | object | JSON with parameters

[%header,cols="1%,1%,97%a"]
[frame="topbot"]
[grid="none"]
[caption=""]
.Properties
!===
! Name      ! Type   !  Description
! key       ! string !  Dynamic component key
! type      ! string !  Dynamic component type(`PAGE`, `PART` or `LAYOUT`)
!===

|===

[.lead]
Returns

*boolean* : `true` if the deletion was successful.

[.lead]
Example

.Removes a layout component:
```js
var result = schemaLib.deleteComponent({
    key: 'myapp:mylayout',
    type: 'LAYOUT'
});

if (result) {
    log.info('Deleted layout: [myapp:mylayout]');
} else {
    log.info('Layout deletion failed: [myapp:mylayout]');
}
```

=== getStyles

Fetch styles from an application.

[.lead]
Parameters

[%header,cols="1%,1%,97%a"]
[frame="none"]
[grid="none"]
|===
| Name   | Type   | Description
| params | object | JSON with parameters

[%header,cols="1%,1%,97%a"]
[frame="topbot"]
[grid="none"]
[caption=""]
.Properties
!===
! Name              ! Type   !  Description
! application       ! string !  Application key
!===

|===

[.lead]
Returns

> *object* : (<<#styles,`Styles`>>) Detail information for the fetched styles.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*object* : (<<#styles,`Styles`>>) Properties object with the fetched styles.
```

[.lead]
Example

.Fetch application styles:
```js
var result = schemaLib.getStyles({
    application: 'myapp'
});
```
.Return value:
```js
var expected = {
    application: 'myapp',
    cssPath: 'assets/styles.css',
    modifiedTime: '2021-02-25T10:44:33.170079900Z',
    resource: '<styles><some-data></some-data></styles>',
    elements: [
        {
            element: 'style',
            displayName: 'Style display name',
            name: 'mystyle'
        }
    ]
};
```

=== createStyles

> Create styles in virtual application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create styles in a virtual application.
```

               '</style>' +
               '<image name="editor-width-auto">' +
               '<display-name i18n="editor-width-auto-text">Override ${width}</display-name>' +
               '</image>' +
               '<image name="editor-style-cinema">' +
               '<display-name i18n="editor-style-cinema-text">Cinema</display-name>' +
               '<aspect-ratio>21:9</aspect-ratio>' +
               '<filter>pixelate(10)</filter>' +
               '</image>' +
               '</styles>';

var result = schemaLib.createStyles({
    application: 'myapp',
    resource
});
```
.Return value:
```js
var expected =
    application: 'myapp',
    cssPath: 'assets/styles.css',
    modifiedTime: '2021-09-25T10:00:00Z',
    resource: <!-- resource string value -->,
    elements: [
        {
            element: 'style',
            displayName: 'Warning',
            name: 'warning'
        },
        {
            element: 'image',
            displayName: 'Override ${width}',
            name: 'editor-width-auto'
        },
        {
            element: 'image',
            displayName: 'Cinema',
            name: 'editor-style-cinema'
        }
    ]
};
```

=== updateStyles

> Updates dynamic styles in virtual application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Updates dynamic styles in a virtual application.
```

[.lead]
Parameters

[%header,cols="1%,1%,97%a"]
[frame="none"]
[grid="none"]
|===
| Name   | Type   | Description
| params | object | JSON with parameters

[%header,cols="1%,1%,97%a"]
[frame="topbot"]
[grid="none"]
[caption=""]
.Properties
!===
! Name              ! Type   !  Description
! application       ! string !  Dynamic application key
! resource          ! string !  Dynamic styles resource value
!===

|===

[.lead]
Returns

> *object* : (<<#styles,`Styles`>>) Detail information for the modified styles.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*object* : (<<#styles,`Styles`>>) Properties object with the modified styles.
```

               '</style>' +
               '<image name="editor-width-auto">' +
               '<display-name i18n="editor-width-auto-text">Override ${width}</display-name>' +
               '</image>' +
               '<image name="editor-style-cinema">' +
               '<display-name i18n="editor-style-cinema-text">Cinema</display-name>' +
               '<aspect-ratio>21:9</aspect-ratio>' +
               '<filter>pixelate(10)</filter>' +
               '</image>' +
               '</styles>';

var result = schemaLib.updateStyles({
    application: 'myapp',
    resource
});
```
.Return value:
```js
var expected = {
    application: 'myapp',
    cssPath: 'assets/styles.css',
    modifiedTime: '2021-09-25T10:00:00Z',
    resource: <!-- resource string value -->,
    elements: [
        {
            element: 'style',
            displayName: 'Warning',
            name: 'warning'
        },
        {
            element: 'image',
            displayName: 'Override ${width}',
            name: 'editor-width-auto'
        },
        {
            element: 'image',
            displayName: 'Cinema',
            name: 'editor-style-cinema'
        }
    ]
};
```

=== deleteStyles

> Removes dynamic styles from virtual application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Removes dynamic styles from a virtual application.
```

[.lead]
Parameters

[%header,cols="1%,1%,97%a"]
[frame="none"]
[grid="none"]
|===
| Name   | Type   | Description
| params | object | JSON with parameters

[%header,cols="1%,1%,97%a"]
[frame="topbot"]
[grid="none"]
[caption=""]
.Properties
!===
! Name              ! Type   !  Description
! application       ! string !  Dynamic application key
!===

|===

[.lead]
Returns

*boolean* : `true` if the deletion was successful.

[.lead]
Example

.Removes an application styles:
```js
var result = schemaLib.deleteStyles({
    application: 'myapp'
});

if (result) {
    log.info('Styles were deleted: [myapp]');
} else {
    log.info('Styles deletion failed: [myapp]');
}
```

=== getSite

> Fetch site descriptor from an application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Fetch a site descriptor from an application.
```

[.lead]
Parameters

[%header,cols="1%,1%,97%a"]
[frame="none"]
[grid="none"]
|===
| Name   | Type   | Description
| params | object | JSON with parameters

[%header,cols="1%,1%,97%a"]
[frame="topbot"]
[grid="none"]
[caption=""]
.Properties
!===
! Name              ! Type   !  Description
! application       ! string !  Application key
!===

|===

[.lead]
Returns

> *object* : (<<#site,`Site`>>) Detail information for fetched site descriptor.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*object* : (<<#site,`Site`>>) Properties object of the fetched site descriptor.
```

[.lead]
Example

.Fetch application site descriptor:
```js
var result = schemaLib.getSite({
    application: 'myapp'
});
```
.Return value:
```js
var expected = {
    application: 'myapp',
    resource: <!-- resource string value -->,
    modifiedTime: '2021-02-25T10:44:33.170079900Z',
    form: [
        {
            'formItemType': 'Input',
            'name': 'input',
            'label': 'Input',
            'maximize': true,
            'inputType': 'Double',
            'occurrences': {
                'maximum': 1,
                'minimum': 0
            },
            'config': {}
        }
    ],
    xDataMappings: [
        {
            'name': 'myapplication:my',
            'optional': false
        }
    ]
};
```

=== updateSite

> Updates dynamic site descriptor in virtual application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Updates dynamic site descriptor in a virtual application.
```
